README.md, before:

# Programming-Languages-Go
Simple examples of Go Programs

## Kata 0
_Print a simple greeting and current time_
```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"time"
)

func main() {
	fmt.Println("Hello!")
	fmt.Println("The time is", time.Now())
}
```

Go programs start in function `main` of package `main`.

Source code from other packages is parsed for declarations via the import statement at the beginning of
each go source code file.
The <a href="https://golang.org/pkg/fmt/" target="_blank">fmt</a> package implements formatted I/O.
The <a href="https://golang.org/pkg/time/" target="_blank">time</a> package provides functionality for
measuring and desplaying time.

The grammar for Go says it uses semicolons to terminate statements. However, if a newline comes after
a token that could end a satement, a semicolon is automatically inserted, so idiomatic Go code uses
very few semicolons, typically only in `for` statements.

To compile and link this program, if it were in the file `kata0.go`, use the command
```bash
go build kata0.go
```
This should result in an executable named `kata0` in the same directory as the source code file.
To run this in a Linux environment, use the command
```bash
./kata0
```

Try running and compiling a Go program in an cloud hosted IDE at
<a href="http://www.tutorialspoint.com/execute_golang_online.php" target="_blank">TutorialsPoint CodingGround</a>
:warning: Warning: The page for TutorialsPoint CodingGround can be slow to appear. A Docker container needs to
be launched on a server in India.

## Kata 1
_Read in 3 integers and print their average_
```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
)

func main() {
	var x, y, z int
	fmt.Println("Input 3 integers on one line & hit [return]")
	fmt.Scanf("%d %d %d", &x, &y, &z)
	sum := x + y + z
	ave := float64(sum) / 3.0
	fmt.Printf("\nAverage: %6.3g\n", ave)
}
```

`x`, `y`, and `z` have their type explicitly declared using the `var` keyword.
`sum` and `ave` have their types inferred from the expression on the right hand side of their initializing expressions by using the `:=` operator which can only be used in such initializations.

As in C, the `&` is the address-of operator, allowing `Scanf` to modify their values.

No mixed-mode arithmetic is allowed, so `sum` must be explicitly converted to match type of `3.0`.

C-like formatting is done with `Printf`. 

Note identifiers from other packages are available for use only if they are capitalized. Access control in Go is
managed without keywords like "public" or "private."

## Kata 2
_Read in a sequence of integers and compute their average._

### Level 0
_Store sequence in a slice with separate functions for input and computation._

```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
)

func main() {
	fmt.Println("Enter integers, one per line, terminate with blank line")
	data := ReadInts()
	ave := AveInts(data)
	fmt.Printf("\nAverage: %6.3g\n", ave)
}

func ReadInts() (result []int) {
	var item int
	nRead, err := fmt.Scanf("%d\n", &item)
	for nRead > 0 && err == nil {
		result = append(result, item)
		nRead, err = fmt.Scanf("%d\n", &item)
	}
	return
}

func AveInts(items []int) (result float64) {
	len := len(items)
	sum := 0
	for i := 0; i < len; i++ {
		sum += items[i]
	}
	result = float64(sum) / float64(len)
	return
}
```

Here we see an example of defining and calling functions.

One way to describe the value returned by a function is shown here. Both a name and a type are specified
in a list. The `return` uses the value stored in the specified name.

The return type of `ReadInts()` is a
<a href="https://golang.org/doc/effective_go.html#slices" target="_blank">slice</a> of integers.
Slices use array-like syntax, but are not fixed size.
A slice can grow by using <a href="" target="_blank">append()</a> to add an element to its end.

Note also that the `for` statement does not require parentheses. It is used in the C/Java-like 3-part form or
like a C/Java `while` with just a condition. Go does not have a `while` keyword.

The rule about automatic semicolon insertion at the end of a line that could potentially be complete forces
the curly brace to be on the same line as the `for` keyword, otherwise the automattically inserted semicolon
would create an empty `for` loop followed by a block of statments. Before sharing code with anyone else, it
is normal for Go programmers to use the `go fmt` command to put Go code in a standard format, including standard
use of indentation and other whitespace.

Pay careful attention to the form of the return value of `Scanf`. It is returning a 
<a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tuple" target="_blank">tuple</a>. The first value in
the tuple is the number of values successfully read. The second value in the tuple is of type `Error` with
the value of `nil` indicating no error. Returning a tuple with the last value being of type `Error` is a Go idiom.
This allows the first part of the tuple to be unrelated to success or failure, with no special values needing
to be realated to failure indicators. Go also has no "Exception" returns or `try`/`catch` constructs which aids
in efficient implementation of function call/return and simpler semantics.

### Level 1
_Use producer-consumer model:_  
+producer reads integers
+consumer computes average
  
```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
)

func main() {
	var aveChannel = make(chan float64)
	var dChannel = make(chan int)
	fmt.Println("Enter integers, one per line, terminate with blank line")
	go produce(dChannel)
	go consume(dChannel, aveChannel)

	fmt.Println("producer/consumer launched")
	ave := <-aveChannel
	fmt.Println("average = ", ave)
}

func produce(dataChannel chan<- int) {
	defer close(dataChannel)
	var item int
	nRead, err := fmt.Scanf("%d\n", &item)
	for nRead > 0 && err == nil {
		dataChannel <- item
		nRead, err = fmt.Scanf("%d\n", &item)
	}
}

func consume(dataChannel <-chan int, aveChannel chan<- float64) {
	sum := 0
	count := 0

	for item := range dataChannel {
		sum += item
		fmt.Println("sum=", sum)
		count++
	}
	aveChannel <- float64(sum) / float64(count)
}
```

This example illustrates the primary constructs for concurrency in Go. A channel is essentially a producer-consumer queue.

The built-in `make` function is used to construct built-in, non-primitive types in Go.
Here it is being used to construct two unbuffered channels, one to transmit integers and the other for floating point numbers.
The keyword `var` is used in conjunction with initializations involving `make` rather than the `:=` operator.

The `go` keyword launches a function in a separate thread. Go refers to these as _*goroutines*_.

A function parameter with a `<-chan` indicates the function can only read from the channel. A value is extracted from
a channel an assigned to a variable with the `<-` operator being used instead of a `=` operator, with the channel on the
right hand side.

A function parameter with a `chan<-` indicates the function can only write to the channel. A value is written to a channel
with the channel on the left hand side and the expression to be written to the channel on the right hand side, again with
syntax similar to a simple assignment statement.

The keyword `range` used in the `for` loop in `consume()` indicates the channel should be read until the writer closes it.
The `defer` statement in `produce()` arranges for the channel to be closed when `produce()` exits.
`defer` is used to ensure a function cleans up after itself when it exits, even if it exits abnormally.
`defer` also allows such cleanup to be specified in a line of code right next to the line that creates a
resource that will need cleanup, rather than farther away where the function is dealing with returning a value.
Since a function may have multiple `return` statements, being able to use `defer` makes sure a cleanup
activity only needs to be specified once.

This particular style of using a goroutine to send values to a channel to another function consuming those values with
a `for`/`range` construct is how Go does
<a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Generator_(computer_programming)" target="_blank">generators</a>
(Python and C# use the `yield` keyword to construct generators). Generators are not part of the Java 8 language or standard
library.

In this example `produce()`, `consume()`, and `main()` are all running concurrently.
The Go runtime manages mapping "goroutines" to threads and may use a thread pool to use
fewer threads than simultaneously active goroutines.
Each goroutine will have its own stack.
These stacks are "segmented" meaning they do not require large contiguous blocks of memory,
instead consisting of a linked structure of chunks of memory.
This allows many simultaneous goroutines to be active without consuming lots of memory to support them.

Here is an example run of this program:
```
Enter integers, one per line, terminate with blank line    
producer/consumer launched                                                                                                 
1
sum= 1                                               
2                                          
sum= 3                                               
4                                          
sum= 7

average =  2.3333333333333335
```

Pay attention to the sequence of input and outputs illustrated to
and observe that concurrent execution is really happening.

## Kata 3
_Recursively compute factorial_
```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
)

func main() {
	fmt.Println("5!=", factorial(5))
	fmt.Printf("50!=%v\n", factorial(50))
}

func factorial(n uint16) float64 {
	if n == 0 {
		return 1.0
	}
	return float64(n) * factorial(n-1)
}
```

Like `for`, `if` does not require parentheses around the conditional expression. Curly braces, however,
are required to group a sequence of statements, even if the sequence is only a single statement.


## Kata 4
_Compute 50th Fibanacci number using a closure
and attempt performance measurement._
### Level 0
_Use iteration_

```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"time"
)

func main() {
	start := time.Now()
	fib0 := closureFib()
	for i := 0; i < 49; i++ {
		fib0()
	}
	f := fib0()
	end := time.Now()
	d := end.Sub(start)
	fmt.Printf("Took %d nanoseconds to compute\n", d.Nanoseconds())
	fmt.Printf("50th Fibbanaci number=%v by iteration sequence\n", f)
}

func closureFib() func() uint {
	var a, b uint = 0, 1
	fib := func() uint {
		result := a
		a, b = b, a+b
		return result
	}
	return fib
}
```

Here is an example of an anonymous function (a.k.a. a "lambda"),
nested inside another function, which returns the inner function.

We also see here an example of tuple assignment in the body of the inner function.
Without tuple assignment, an extra temporary variable would need to be introduced.

The subtle thing is that the inner function uses variables that are local to the
outer function. This makes the inner function
a <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Closure_(computer_programming)" target="_blank">closure</a>.
It uses these
variables even after the outer function has returned, indicating that the
<a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Call_stack#ACTIVATION-RECORD" target="_blank">stack frame / activation record</a>
in which they reside has persisted. These values, however,
are not global to the whole program, package, or file and another instance of
them would be created if `closureFib()` were invoked again.

### Level 1
_Use recursion with memoization_
```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"time"
)

func main() {
	fib := memoFib()

	start := time.Now()
	fib50 := fib(49)
	end := time.Now()
	d := end.Sub(start)
	fmt.Printf("Took %d nanoseconds to compute\n", d.Nanoseconds())
	fmt.Printf("50th Fibbanaci number=%d by recursion (first try)\n", fib50)

	// faster on second try because just one table lookup
	start = time.Now()
	fib50 = fib(49)
	end = time.Now()
	d = end.Sub(start)
	fmt.Printf("\nTook %d nanoseconds to compute\n", d.Nanoseconds())
	fmt.Printf("50th Fibbanaci number=%d by recursion (second try)\n", fib50)
}

func memoFib() func(uint) uint {
	var table []uint
	table = append(table, 0)
	table = append(table, 1)

	var fib func(uint) uint
	fib = func(n uint) uint {
		if n >= uint(len(table)) {
			result := fib(n-2) + fib(n-1)
			table = append(table, result)
		}
		return table[n]
	}
	return fib
}
```

This implementation of the Kata uses the more common recursive implementation of the algorithm
to compute the n<sup>th</sup> Fibonacci number. Typcially, this algorithm is very inefficient
due to repeated computations of the same previous value. This code uses a technique called
memoization to save previous results so they can be looked up in a table after they are
first computed. The closure has access to the lookup table which is local to the function
in which it is nested.

Not only does this speed the computation relative to the traditional recursive algorithm, but
if the closure is invoked a second time with the same argument, the result is returned immediately
by a table lookup.

Any "pure" function can be memoized to trade space for time.

## Stack implementations

```Go
package stack

import (
	"container/list"
	"errors"
)

type Stack interface {
	Push(int)
	Pop() (int, error)
	Peek() (int, error)
}

type SliceStack struct {
	s []int
}

func NewSliceStack() SliceStack {
	return SliceStack{s: make([]int, 0, 1)}
}

func (ss *SliceStack) Push(item int) {
	ss.s = append(ss.s, item)
}

func (ss *SliceStack) Pop() (int, error) {
	if len(ss.s) == 0 {
		return 0, errors.New("empty")
	}
	top := ss.s[len(ss.s)-1]
	ss.s = ss.s[:len(ss.s)-1]
	return top, nil
}

func (ss *SliceStack) Peek() (int, error) {
	if len(ss.s) == 0 {
		return 0, errors.New("empty")
	}
	return ss.s[len(ss.s)-1], nil
}

type ListStack struct {
	pList *list.List
}

func NewListStack() ListStack {
	return ListStack{pList: list.New()}

}

func (ls *ListStack) Push(value int) {
	ls.pList.PushFront(value)
}

func (ls *ListStack) Pop() (int, error) {
	frontElement := ls.pList.Front()
	if frontElement == nil {
		return 0, errors.New("empty")
	}
	result := frontElement.Value.(int)
	ls.pList.Remove(frontElement)
	return result, nil
}

func (ls *ListStack) Peek() (int, error) {
	frontElement := ls.pList.Front()
	if frontElement == nil {
		return 0, errors.New("empty")
	}
	return frontElement.Value.(int), nil
}
```

This is the first example of using a package other than `main`. All of the source for each
package needs to be in a separate directory, so all of the source code for a package
is in the same directory (all by itself).

The package will be imported as `github.com/paulbuis/stack` so this source file, named `stack.go`,
should be in `$GOPATH/src/github.com/paulbuis/stack`.

On a command line in that directory, the package can be compiled with the command
```bash
go build stack.go
```

If successful, the package needs to be installed as a library in `$GOPATH/pkg/$GOARCH/github.com/paulbuis/stack` where
`$GOARCH` represents the OS/HW architecture for which the package is being compiled. This is done (after the build step) with the command
```bash
go install github.com/paulbuis/stack
```

The file contains an `interface` named Stack and two `struct` types that data to implement this abstract
data type.
Note that the names of the fields are lowercase. This makes them only available to functions in the same
package where the struct is being defined and is similar to the notion of `private` in
languages that use that keyword.

For each concrete data type implementing the Stack interface, there is a function that intitializes
and returns a value representing an empty stack. There are also methods that implement each of the
methods declared in the interface. These functions all have uppercase names which allow them to be
invoked from other packages.

The thing that seems paricularly odd to C++/C#/Java programmers with the linked list code is that Go doesn't have "generic" types.
Hence, when retrieving a value from the list, a type assertion is made at runtime, much like had to be done
in Java before "generics" where added to the language.

Technically, Go is not "Object oridented" because it does not implement inheritance. It does, however, allow
for encapsulation by using lower-case names in seperate package and allow polymorphism via functions that take
arguments declared to be interfaces.

Importantly, the types that implement the interface don't need to declare the fact. When the struct is passed
to a function expecting something thate implements the interface, the compiler checks that the struct has
the needed methods. This is referred to a "structural" type check rather than "nominal" (meaning that a
shared "name" is used) type check.

##stackdemo
```Go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"github.com/paulbuis/stack"
)

func main() {
	fmt.Println("trying a SliceStack")
	st0 := stack.NewSliceStack()
	useStack(&st0)

	fmt.Println("trying a ListStack")
	st1 := stack.NewListStack()
	useStack(&st1)

}

func useStack(s stack.Stack) {
	s.Push(1)
	s.Push(2)
	val, err := s.Peek()
	if err == nil {
		fmt.Println(val)
	} else {
		return
	}

	val, err = s.Pop()
	if err == nil {
		fmt.Println(val)
	} else {
		return
	}
	val, err = s.Pop()
	if err == nil {
		fmt.Println(val)
	}
}
```

Here is a demonstration of the use of the separately compiled stack type. Note that the import statement
uses a path prefixed with `github.com/paulbuis` which would normally mean that the package had been installed
with a command such as 

```
go get github.com/paulbuis/stack
```

This command would clone the repository into `$GOPATH/src/github.com/paulbuis/stack` and do the `go build` and `go install` steps automatically.
In the process, if the source in the repository contained imports of other uninstalled packages, their
source would be automatically downloaded, compiled, and installed, recursively.
Note that in order to use a package, its source must be available to the compiler, not just the compiled code in the package library.
Its source is also looked for in $GOROOT (where the standard library packages are found) and $GOPATH and parsed to perform type checking on the packages that use it.

Commit message:

Fixed formatting error, added some content
Elaborated on the role of OS threads.

Added ??? about the need for source code of compiled libraries when compiling packages that import the library.

README.md, after:

# Programming-Languages-Go
Simple examples of Go Programs

## Kata 0
_Print a simple greeting and current time_
```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"time"
)

func main() {
	fmt.Println("Hello!")
	fmt.Println("The time is", time.Now())
}
```

Go programs start in function `main` of package `main`.

Source code from other packages is parsed for declarations via the import statement at the beginning of
each go source code file.
The <a href="https://golang.org/pkg/fmt/" target="_blank">fmt</a> package implements formatted I/O.
The <a href="https://golang.org/pkg/time/" target="_blank">time</a> package provides functionality for
measuring and desplaying time.

The grammar for Go says it uses semicolons to terminate statements. However, if a newline comes after
a token that could end a satement, a semicolon is automatically inserted, so idiomatic Go code uses
very few semicolons, typically only in `for` statements.

To compile and link this program, if it were in the file `kata0.go`, use the command
```bash
go build kata0.go
```
This should result in an executable named `kata0` in the same directory as the source code file.
To run this in a Linux environment, use the command
```bash
./kata0
```

Try running and compiling a Go program in an cloud hosted IDE at
<a href="http://www.tutorialspoint.com/execute_golang_online.php" target="_blank">TutorialsPoint CodingGround</a>
:warning: Warning: The page for TutorialsPoint CodingGround can be slow to appear. A Docker container needs to
be launched on a server in India.

## Kata 1
_Read in 3 integers and print their average_
```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
)

func main() {
	var x, y, z int
	fmt.Println("Input 3 integers on one line & hit [return]")
	fmt.Scanf("%d %d %d", &x, &y, &z)
	sum := x + y + z
	ave := float64(sum) / 3.0
	fmt.Printf("\nAverage: %6.3g\n", ave)
}
```

`x`, `y`, and `z` have their type explicitly declared using the `var` keyword.
`sum` and `ave` have their types inferred from the expression on the right hand side of their initializing expressions by using the `:=` operator which can only be used in such initializations.

As in C, the `&` is the address-of operator, allowing `Scanf` to modify their values.

No mixed-mode arithmetic is allowed, so `sum` must be explicitly converted to match type of `3.0`.

C-like formatting is done with `Printf`. 

Note identifiers from other packages are available for use only if they are capitalized. Access control in Go is
managed without keywords like "public" or "private."

## Kata 2
_Read in a sequence of integers and compute their average._

### Level 0
_Store sequence in a slice with separate functions for input and computation._

```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
)

func main() {
	fmt.Println("Enter integers, one per line, terminate with blank line")
	data := ReadInts()
	ave := AveInts(data)
	fmt.Printf("\nAverage: %6.3g\n", ave)
}

func ReadInts() (result []int) {
	var item int
	nRead, err := fmt.Scanf("%d\n", &item)
	for nRead > 0 && err == nil {
		result = append(result, item)
		nRead, err = fmt.Scanf("%d\n", &item)
	}
	return
}

func AveInts(items []int) (result float64) {
	len := len(items)
	sum := 0
	for i := 0; i < len; i++ {
		sum += items[i]
	}
	result = float64(sum) / float64(len)
	return
}
```

Here we see an example of defining and calling functions.

One way to describe the value returned by a function is shown here. Both a name and a type are specified
in a list. The `return` uses the value stored in the specified name.

The return type of `ReadInts()` is a
<a href="https://golang.org/doc/effective_go.html#slices" target="_blank">slice</a> of integers.
Slices use array-like syntax, but are not fixed size.
A slice can grow by using <a href="" target="_blank">append()</a> to add an element to its end.

Note also that the `for` statement does not require parentheses. It is used in the C/Java-like 3-part form or
like a C/Java `while` with just a condition. Go does not have a `while` keyword.

The rule about automatic semicolon insertion at the end of a line that could potentially be complete forces
the curly brace to be on the same line as the `for` keyword, otherwise the automattically inserted semicolon
would create an empty `for` loop followed by a block of statments. Before sharing code with anyone else, it
is normal for Go programmers to use the `go fmt` command to put Go code in a standard format, including standard
use of indentation and other whitespace.

Pay careful attention to the form of the return value of `Scanf`. It is returning a 
<a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tuple" target="_blank">tuple</a>. The first value in
the tuple is the number of values successfully read. The second value in the tuple is of type `Error` with
the value of `nil` indicating no error. Returning a tuple with the last value being of type `Error` is a Go idiom.
This allows the first part of the tuple to be unrelated to success or failure, with no special values needing
to be realated to failure indicators. Go also has no "Exception" returns or `try`/`catch` constructs which aids
in efficient implementation of function call/return and simpler semantics.

### Level 1
_Use producer-consumer model:_  
-producer reads integers
-consumer computes average
  
```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
)

func main() {
	var aveChannel = make(chan float64)
	var dChannel = make(chan int)
	fmt.Println("Enter integers, one per line, terminate with blank line")
	go produce(dChannel)
	go consume(dChannel, aveChannel)

	fmt.Println("producer/consumer launched")
	ave := <-aveChannel
	fmt.Println("average = ", ave)
}

func produce(dataChannel chan<- int) {
	defer close(dataChannel)
	var item int
	nRead, err := fmt.Scanf("%d\n", &item)
	for nRead > 0 && err == nil {
		dataChannel <- item
		nRead, err = fmt.Scanf("%d\n", &item)
	}
}

func consume(dataChannel <-chan int, aveChannel chan<- float64) {
	sum := 0
	count := 0

	for item := range dataChannel {
		sum += item
		fmt.Println("sum=", sum)
		count++
	}
	aveChannel <- float64(sum) / float64(count)
}
```

This example illustrates the primary constructs for concurrency in Go. A channel is essentially a producer-consumer queue.

The built-in `make` function is used to construct built-in, non-primitive types in Go.
Here it is being used to construct two unbuffered channels, one to transmit integers and the other for floating point numbers.
The keyword `var` is used in conjunction with initializations involving `make` rather than the `:=` operator.

The `go` keyword launches a function as a separate "task." Tasks may run in separate threads.
The Go runtime schedules tasks in available threads.  Go refers to these as _*goroutines*_. Note that

A function parameter with a `<-chan` indicates the function can only read from the channel. A value is extracted from
a channel an assigned to a variable with the `<-` operator being used instead of a `=` operator, with the channel on the
right hand side.

A function parameter with a `chan<-` indicates the function can only write to the channel. A value is written to a channel
with the channel on the left hand side and the expression to be written to the channel on the right hand side, again with
syntax similar to a simple assignment statement.

The keyword `range` used in the `for` loop in `consume()` indicates the channel should be read until the writer closes it.
The `defer` statement in `produce()` arranges for the channel to be closed when `produce()` exits.
`defer` is used to ensure a function cleans up after itself when it exits, even if it exits abnormally.
`defer` also allows such cleanup to be specified in a line of code right next to the line that creates a
resource that will need cleanup, rather than farther away where the function is dealing with returning a value.
Since a function may have multiple `return` statements, being able to use `defer` makes sure a cleanup
activity only needs to be specified once.

This particular style of using a goroutine to send values to a channel to another function consuming those values with
a `for`/`range` construct is how Go does
<a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Generator_(computer_programming)" target="_blank">generators</a>
(Python and C# use the `yield` keyword to construct generators). Generators are not part of the Java 8 language or standard
library.

In this example `produce()`, `consume()`, and `main()` are all running concurrently.
The Go runtime manages mapping "goroutines" to threads and may use a thread pool to use
fewer threads than simultaneously active goroutines.
Each goroutine will have its own stack.
These stacks are "segmented" meaning they do not require large contiguous blocks of memory,
instead consisting of a linked structure of chunks of memory.
This allows many simultaneous goroutines to be active without consuming lots of memory to support them.

The number of active threads used to support goroutines is normally controlled by the GOMAXPROCS environment variable.
It can also be controlled by using the GOMAXPROCS function in the package named "runtime." The function runtime.NumCPU()
can be used to query the number of logical CPUS ("cores") available. Note that the number of active threads does not include
threads that are blocked doing I/O or reading/writing from a channel.
If the number of active tasks exceeds the number of available active threads, the Go language runtime
is responsible for figuring out how to share threads across tasks.
It is questionalbe practice to set GOMAXPROCS larger than NumCPU, since that will require the OS to timeslice threads over CPU cores
which will incur additional context swtiching overhead.

Here is an example run of this program:
```
Enter integers, one per line, terminate with blank line    
producer/consumer launched                                                                                                 
1
sum= 1                                               
2                                          
sum= 3                                               
4                                          
sum= 7

average =  2.3333333333333335
```

Pay attention to the sequence of input and outputs illustrated to
and observe that concurrent execution is really happening.

## Kata 3
_Recursively compute factorial_
```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
)

func main() {
	fmt.Println("5!=", factorial(5))
	fmt.Printf("50!=%v\n", factorial(50))
}

func factorial(n uint16) float64 {
	if n == 0 {
		return 1.0
	}
	return float64(n) * factorial(n-1)
}
```

Like `for`, `if` does not require parentheses around the conditional expression. Curly braces, however,
are required to group a sequence of statements, even if the sequence is only a single statement.


## Kata 4
_Compute 50th Fibanacci number using a closure
and attempt performance measurement._
### Level 0
_Use iteration_

```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"time"
)

func main() {
	start := time.Now()
	fib0 := closureFib()
	for i := 0; i < 49; i++ {
		fib0()
	}
	f := fib0()
	end := time.Now()
	d := end.Sub(start)
	fmt.Printf("Took %d nanoseconds to compute\n", d.Nanoseconds())
	fmt.Printf("50th Fibbanaci number=%v by iteration sequence\n", f)
}

func closureFib() func() uint {
	var a, b uint = 0, 1
	fib := func() uint {
		result := a
		a, b = b, a+b
		return result
	}
	return fib
}
```

Here is an example of an anonymous function (a.k.a. a "lambda"),
nested inside another function, which returns the inner function.

We also see here an example of tuple assignment in the body of the inner function.
Without tuple assignment, an extra temporary variable would need to be introduced.

The subtle thing is that the inner function uses variables that are local to the
outer function. This makes the inner function
a <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Closure_(computer_programming)" target="_blank">closure</a>.
It uses these
variables even after the outer function has returned, indicating that the
<a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Call_stack#ACTIVATION-RECORD" target="_blank">stack frame / activation record</a>
in which they reside has persisted. These values, however,
are not global to the whole program, package, or file and another instance of
them would be created if `closureFib()` were invoked again.

### Level 1
_Use recursion with memoization_
```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"time"
)

func main() {
	fib := memoFib()

	start := time.Now()
	fib50 := fib(49)
	end := time.Now()
	d := end.Sub(start)
	fmt.Printf("Took %d nanoseconds to compute\n", d.Nanoseconds())
	fmt.Printf("50th Fibbanaci number=%d by recursion (first try)\n", fib50)

	// faster on second try because just one table lookup
	start = time.Now()
	fib50 = fib(49)
	end = time.Now()
	d = end.Sub(start)
	fmt.Printf("\nTook %d nanoseconds to compute\n", d.Nanoseconds())
	fmt.Printf("50th Fibbanaci number=%d by recursion (second try)\n", fib50)
}

func memoFib() func(uint) uint {
	var table []uint
	table = append(table, 0)
	table = append(table, 1)

	var fib func(uint) uint
	fib = func(n uint) uint {
		if n >= uint(len(table)) {
			result := fib(n-2) + fib(n-1)
			table = append(table, result)
		}
		return table[n]
	}
	return fib
}
```

This implementation of the Kata uses the more common recursive implementation of the algorithm
to compute the n<sup>th</sup> Fibonacci number. Typcially, this algorithm is very inefficient
due to repeated computations of the same previous value. This code uses a technique called
memoization to save previous results so they can be looked up in a table after they are
first computed. The closure has access to the lookup table which is local to the function
in which it is nested.

Not only does this speed the computation relative to the traditional recursive algorithm, but
if the closure is invoked a second time with the same argument, the result is returned immediately
by a table lookup.

Any "pure" function can be memoized to trade space for time.

## Stack implementations

```Go
package stack

import (
	"container/list"
	"errors"
)

type Stack interface {
	Push(int)
	Pop() (int, error)
	Peek() (int, error)
}

type SliceStack struct {
	s []int
}

func NewSliceStack() SliceStack {
	return SliceStack{s: make([]int, 0, 1)}
}

func (ss *SliceStack) Push(item int) {
	ss.s = append(ss.s, item)
}

func (ss *SliceStack) Pop() (int, error) {
	if len(ss.s) == 0 {
		return 0, errors.New("empty")
	}
	top := ss.s[len(ss.s)-1]
	ss.s = ss.s[:len(ss.s)-1]
	return top, nil
}

func (ss *SliceStack) Peek() (int, error) {
	if len(ss.s) == 0 {
		return 0, errors.New("empty")
	}
	return ss.s[len(ss.s)-1], nil
}

type ListStack struct {
	pList *list.List
}

func NewListStack() ListStack {
	return ListStack{pList: list.New()}

}

func (ls *ListStack) Push(value int) {
	ls.pList.PushFront(value)
}

func (ls *ListStack) Pop() (int, error) {
	frontElement := ls.pList.Front()
	if frontElement == nil {
		return 0, errors.New("empty")
	}
	result := frontElement.Value.(int)
	ls.pList.Remove(frontElement)
	return result, nil
}

func (ls *ListStack) Peek() (int, error) {
	frontElement := ls.pList.Front()
	if frontElement == nil {
		return 0, errors.New("empty")
	}
	return frontElement.Value.(int), nil
}
```

This is the first example of using a package other than `main`. All of the source for each
package needs to be in a separate directory, so all of the source code for a package
is in the same directory (all by itself).

The package will be imported as `github.com/paulbuis/stack` so this source file, named `stack.go`,
should be in `$GOPATH/src/github.com/paulbuis/stack`.

On a command line in that directory, the package can be compiled with the command
```bash
go build stack.go
```

If successful, the package needs to be installed as a library in `$GOPATH/pkg/$GOARCH/github.com/paulbuis/stack` where
`$GOARCH` represents the OS/HW architecture for which the package is being compiled. This is done (after the build step) with the command
```bash
go install github.com/paulbuis/stack
```

The file contains an `interface` named Stack and two `struct` types that data to implement this abstract
data type.
Note that the names of the fields are lowercase. This makes them only available to functions in the same
package where the struct is being defined and is similar to the notion of `private` in
languages that use that keyword.

For each concrete data type implementing the Stack interface, there is a function that intitializes
and returns a value representing an empty stack. There are also methods that implement each of the
methods declared in the interface. These functions all have uppercase names which allow them to be
invoked from other packages.

The thing that seems paricularly odd to C++/C#/Java programmers with the linked list code is that Go doesn't have "generic" types.
Hence, when retrieving a value from the list, a type assertion is made at runtime, much like had to be done
in Java before "generics" where added to the language.

Technically, Go is not "Object oridented" because it does not implement inheritance. It does, however, allow
for encapsulation by using lower-case names in seperate package and allow polymorphism via functions that take
arguments declared to be interfaces.

Importantly, the types that implement the interface don't need to declare the fact. When the struct is passed
to a function expecting something thate implements the interface, the compiler checks that the struct has
the needed methods. This is referred to a "structural" type check rather than "nominal" (meaning that a
shared "name" is used) type check.

##stackdemo
```Go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"github.com/paulbuis/stack"
)

func main() {
	fmt.Println("trying a SliceStack")
	st0 := stack.NewSliceStack()
	useStack(&st0)

	fmt.Println("trying a ListStack")
	st1 := stack.NewListStack()
	useStack(&st1)

}

func useStack(s stack.Stack) {
	s.Push(1)
	s.Push(2)
	val, err := s.Peek()
	if err == nil {
		fmt.Println(val)
	} else {
		return
	}

	val, err = s.Pop()
	if err == nil {
		fmt.Println(val)
	} else {
		return
	}
	val, err = s.Pop()
	if err == nil {
		fmt.Println(val)
	}
}
```

Here is a demonstration of the use of the separately compiled stack type. Note that the import statement
uses a path prefixed with `github.com/paulbuis` which would normally mean that the package had been installed
with a command such as 

```
go get github.com/paulbuis/stack
```

This command would clone the repository into `$GOPATH/src/github.com/paulbuis/stack` and do the `go build` and `go install` steps automatically.
In the process, if the source in the repository contained imports of other uninstalled packages, their
source would be automatically downloaded, compiled, and installed, recursively.
Note that in order to use a package, its source must be available to the compiler, not just the compiled code in the package library (is this really true???).
Its source is also looked for in $GOROOT (where the standard library packages are found) and $GOPATH and parsed to perform type checking on the packages that use it.
